.. include:: preamble.rst

#######
Preface
#######

This volume was born several years ago in Italian, and was the main
material for an advanced course on optimization modeling for student
in management engineering at my Università deli Studi di Firenze. The
course is no more active and also the publisher of that book is no
more active, so that material remained unused for quite  a few
years. I decided now to reconsider it as I think that in these days
modeling skills are fundamental, even more than before. Differently
from when I wrote my italian book, nowadays data, data science, analytics
are terms we can find everywhere.  Every company is moving towards
data-oriented approaches, mainly following the giant waves of machine
learning and artificial intelligence.  However, some companies are
experiencing difficulties, as the return on investment seems to be
below expectations. I have neither an explanation nor a recipe for
this. But I suspect the reasons might be many: from one side the too
high expectations, but, from another side, the fact that mangaers
forgot that most of modern data science and machine learning is devoted
to predictive analytics. And this is indeed very good: having the
possibility of learning from data so that future (demand, production,
yield, interest rates, ...) can be reliably and robustly forecast is
wonderful. However, after a reliable forecast is available, managers
still need to take decisions. And this is where optimization
(operations research) comes into play. We have been teaching all
possible methods and theoretical aspects of optimization. However I
feel there is still a wide gap which separates academic research from
day to day practical implementation. And, in my opinion, part of this
is due to the lack of sufficient modeling skills. If we cannot model
a problem, no natter how sophisticated our optimization algorithm are,
we will not be able to solve any problem. We need to communicate our
problem to a solver. And to do this we need a deep knowledge of
models.

Modeling is  a creative skill, which is best learned by doing;
however, especially for more advance models involving integer
variables, modeling practice should be paired by a deep theoretical
knowledge, if we wish to solve large scale problems.

My interest in modeling arose by chance many years ago, thanks to a
stimulating activity of book reviewer I did in my early years in the
academia. Among the many books I received, I got to review, at some time, the
fundamental book of Hans Paul Williams :cite:`Williams13` (indeeed it
was a much earlier edition than the one cited here). That book opened
a new world to me: up to that time I had been thinking to the
algorithmic aspects of optimization as the most relevant ones. But
that book made me understand that without suitable formulation no
problem can ever be solved, whichever the refined algorithms you have
available. This seemingly trivial observation has indeed many
consequences. One of these is the fact that we need to be organized
and disciplined in formulating an optimization model; modeling can be
somewhat confronted with jazz music: it is true that the essence of
jazz is improvisation, but  improvisation is something you can master
only after a long period of study and practice. The same for modeling:
formulating a linear optimization model is not something which can be
done simply after having learnt the details of the simplex algorithm:
practice and modeling theory is needed before a robust, reliable,
useful model can be produced. Williams' book opened my eyes on this
fascinating subject; more or less at the same time I also had the
opportunity of learning and using `GAMS <https://www.gams.com/>`_ - Generalized Algebraic
Modeling System. This modeling tool let
me understand that even to formulate a "simple" linear optimization
problem it is not enough to be able to write the cost vector, the
constraint matrix, the right hand side. Or, more precisely, yes it
would be enough. But the effort in preparing these data can be
enormously reduced if a modeling language is used. This is even more
true when dealing with non linear models. GAMS is nowadays
not the unique modeling system  available today. I have been using
`AMPL <https://www.ampl.com>`_ - A Mathematical Programming Language,
`AIMMS <https://www.aimms.com/>`_, 
all of which are commercial products, or `JuMP <https://jump.dev/>`_ (Julia Mathematical
Programming)  and `Pyomo <http://www.pyomo.org/>`_ (Python Optimization
Modeling) which are open source.  There
are many others, most of which however are limited to specific classes
of problems like, e.g., linear models only.

One may ask then why I felt the need to write a book on optimization
modeling.  First of all, of course, I confess I like writing and
teaching and this is something I would do even if useless...
But, also, I think that it is quite unusual that for such an important
topic the most authorative textbook is still the excellent book by
Williams which although re-published several times, is more or less
unchanged since the 80's, when the first edition appeared. I think
there is a space nowadays for a more modern view of that classical
textbook, which is and remains a fundamental reference for me as well
as many in the optimization community. But in these years many things
happened: advances in software, in modeling environments, in
programming languages, in application domains. And, among the many
novelties, also the way in which we publish radically changed.
I took the decision to publish my book as a web site, with a companion
github repo for models and data. The idea is that of a dynamic book,
which can easily change thanks to the addition of models, data,
modeling languages. For many different reasons, I became more used to
the AMPL language than any other. But I would like to ask my readers
to contribute with translations of my AMPL models in other modeling
environments (and, of course, to suggest modification and corrections
to those I wrote). There will be also printed editions of this book,
for those who prefer having a book on paper,    but the on line web
edition will in any case be the preferred one.

In writing this book I also decided, for the first time in my academic
life, not to write a book
(or a paper) in LaTeX from beginning to end. It was a difficult
choice, as I cannot thin of any other way to write on math. But modern
markup languages, like Sphinx, make the effort in writing a web book
so light that eventually I decided to use this system. Of course,
however, all of the mathematical formulae and the figures have been
composed in LaTex, with the help of the tikz package.

.. include:: closing.rst

